COG-BCI database: A multi-session and 
multi-task EEG cognitive dataset for 
passive brain-computer interfaces 
 
M. F. Hinss, E. S. Jahanpour, B. Somon, L. Pluchon, F. Dehais, R. N. Roy 
 
Abstract 
Brain-Computer Interfaces, and especially passive Brain-Computer Interfaces (pBCI), with 
their ability to estimate and detect mental states, are receiving increasing attention from both 
the scientific and the research and development communities. Many pBCIs aim to increase 
the safety of complex work envir onments such as in the aeronautical domain. Therefore, 
mental workload, vigilance and decision -making are some of the most commonly examined 
aspects of cognition within this field of research. A large proportion of pBCIs involve a 
component of machine learning and signal processing as the data that are collected need to 
be transformed into a reliable estimate of the users’ current mental state (e.g. mental 
workload). Improving this component is a major challenge for researchers, requiring large 
quantities of data. While data sharing is common for the active BCI community, open pBCI 
datasets are scarcer and generally incomplete with regards to the information they report. This 
is particularly true for datasets encompassing several tasks or sessions, which are  of 
importance for tackling the challenges of transfer learning. Testing new pipelines, feature 
extraction algorithms and classifiers are central issues for future advances in research 
within this domain, as well as for algorithm benchmark and research rep roducibility.The 
COG-BCI database presented here is comprised of the recordings of 29 participants over 3 
individual sessions with 4 different tasks designed to elicit different cognitive states. This 
results in a total of over 100 hours of open electrophysiological (EEG) and electrocardiogram 
(ECG) data. The project was validated by the local ethical committee of the University of 
Toulouse (CER number 2021-342). The dataset was validated on a subjective, behavioral and 
physiological level (i.e. cardiac and  cerebral activity), to ensure its usefulness to the pBCI 
community. This body of work represents a large effort to promote the use of pBCIs, as well 
as the use of open science. 
 
 
 
 
Tasks 
The COG-BCI database comprises four different tasks independently as sessed over 
three sessions (spaced exactly one week apart). Furthermore, a resting state (one minute of 
eyes open and one minute of eyes closed) was collected at the beginning and the end of each 
session. The four different tasks were chosen in order to assess several aspects of executive 
functioning. The MATB and N -back task were used to assess different levels of mental 
workload. The Psychomotor Vigilance Task (PVT) was used to study vigilance decrement and 
the Flanker task for decision making and conflic t.  Each task lasted from five to ten minutes. 
For each participant and session, the order of tasks was pseudorandomized and is reported 
in the Database Notebook. 
 
All the tasks were coded with home-made scripts in MATLAB, with the PsychToolBox-
3 (http://psychtoolbox.org/) software. For each session, participants were comfortably seated 
approximately 50 cm away from a 120 Hz refresh rate computer screen. During each task, 
their responses were recorded either through a keyboard (N-back task, PVT and Flanker task) 
or through both a joystick (Extreme 3D Pro Logitec) and keyboard (MATB). The responses, 
reaction times, electrocardiogram (ECG) and EEG signals were collected from each 
participant throughout the entire session.  
 
1. Psychomotor Vigilance Task 
The PVT is a 10-minute measure of Vigilance (Dinges & Powell, 1985; Lamond et al., 
2005). Participants receive instructions on the computer screen stating that they have to press the 
spacebar of the keyboard as soon as a timer appears on the screen.   Each trial starts with an 
interstimulus interval (ISI) with a duration jittered between 2 -10 seconds. After the ISI,  the 
stimulus/timer appears. The timer continues to run until the participant reacts by hitting the 
spacebar. After the button press is registered, the timer stops and displays the final reaction 
time on the computer screen for another 500 ms. The task was designed to closely resemble 
the PC -PVT 2.0, an established computer version of the PVT (Reifman et al., 2018) . 
Participants completed a total of 90 trials for this task during each session. 
 
2. N-Back Task  
The N -Back Task is a widely used measure of both working memory and mental 
workload. On a computer screen participants are presented with single numbers appearing 
for a short period of time (Brouwer et al., 2012; Jaeggi et al., 2010). Participants are instructed 
to remember the order in which the numbers appear and to react with a button press if the 
presented number is the same as the N-th number presented before. The N here is a variable 
that determines the difficulty of a particular block. With the increasing size of N, the difficulty 
of the task increases, as more numbers need to be retained.  Trials begin with the presentation 
of a number for 500 ms, followed by a blank screen for 1500 ms. If the number presented is a 
hit number (e.g. in the 1 -back condition, the same as the previous number), participants are 
instructed to respond by hitting the spacebar of the keyboard. In the 0 -back condition, 
participants are instructed to respond whenever a previously determined target number (e.g. 
“3”) appears. The frequency of hit numbers appearing in all three conditions is fixed at 1/3 (16 
hit trials per block). In the 2-back condition, five conflict trials are added per block. The conflict 
trials are characterized by a number being followed immediately by the same number again. 
This should not prompt any reaction from the participant but has been suggested to result in 
eliciting conflict (Oberauer et al., 2005) . As these trials would also occur during full 
randomization of the numbers, they have no adverse effect on the participant’s performance. 
Participants completed three blocks of each  a 0 -back, a 1-back and a 2-back condition ( for 
a total of 9 blocks). Each block has a duration of around two minutes and consists of 48 trials. 
The total time to complete 3 blocks of one condition was 6 minutes. Before the onset of each 
block, the participant was informed about the condition of the block as well as given a short 
instruction on what to do.  
3. MATB 
NASA developed the MATB -II task 1 to assess task -switching and mental workload 
capacities (Santiago-Espada et al., 2011) . Here participants are presented with up to 6 
different tasks that they have to complete simultaneously. This provides a highly realistic 
environment of operational systems that the researcher can control to create different degrees 
of difficulty. An adapted ver sion2, coded in Matlab but providing the same measures as the 
original MATB-II task, was used (Verdière et al., 20 20). For a full description of the original 
task and subtasks refer to Santiago-Espada et al. (2011). For this study, combinations of four 
of the available subtasks of the MATB were used. In the tracking task (TR ACK), participants 
are presented with a moving target inside of a window. The goal is to keep, using a joystick, 
the target within the window. The degree of difficulty can be adapted by modifying the degree 
and the speed at which the target moves. For the System monitoring task (SYSMON), 
participants have to monitor gauges and warning lights. Action is required in the absence of a 
green light, the presence of a red light and deviations of four moving pointers dials from a 
midpoint. The system monitoring task is controlled by input into specific keyboard commands. 
The degree of difficulty can be adapted by increasing the number of events to which the 
participant has to react to. In the communications task (COMM), participants are required to 
listen to radio messages and determine if they are of importance to the operator (calling his/her 
call sign) or not (calling another call sign). If the message is relevant, the operator is required 
to change the frequency of a radio channel to a frequency specified in the message. The last 
task that is used is the Resource Management Task (RESMAN). Participants are presented 
with an interface displaying two main tanks and four subsidiary tanks interconnected via eight 
pumps bearing various fuel flows. The goal is to maintain a specific level of fluid in both of the 
main tanks. Participants can do this by activating or deactivating the pumps. In order to 
increase the difficulty of the task, events such as pump failures can be introduced.  
In the current study, participants performed three independent 5-minute runs of three 
degrees of difficulty (i.e. see scenarios 2, 3 and 4 in Cabon et al., 2006). For the easy condition, 
participants only engage in the system monitoring and the tracking task. For the medium 
condition, participants engage in both tasks as well as the fuel management task. For the 
difficult condition, the communication task is added as well as the tracking task is made more 
difficult. Before the start of each run, participants also received a short instruction.  
                                                
1 https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20110014456 
2 https://github.com/VrdrKv/MATB/blob/master/README.md 
4. Flanker 
The Flanker task is a simple choice reaction task that elicits conflict during a binary 
decision (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974) . Participants are presented with stimuli composed of 5 
arrows in the center of a computer screen. They are instructed to react to the middle arrow 
and ignore the distracting (flanker) arrows on either side. These so -called flanker stimuli can 
either point in the same direction (congruent condition) or in the opposite  direction 
(incongruent condition) as the central target. A typical stimulus may therefore look like ‘< < > 
< <’ or ‘< < < < <’. The correct response to the first stimulus is ‘>’ while the response to the 
second stimulus is ‘<’. Each trial begins with an ISI of 2000 ms. Following the ISI, the stimulus 
is presented. Each of the four possible stimuli ('> > < > >'  '< < < < <'  '< < > < <'  '> > > > >') 
are presented equally frequently (0.25) in a pseudorandom order. The stimulus is presented 
for a fixed time of 16 ms which was determined in a pilot study based on changes in error 
rates. After the stimulus presentation, the same blank screen with a fixation cross is shown for 
2250-2750 ms. In this time period, the participant is required to respond. At the end of the trial, 
the participant receives feedback about the outcome (correct, incorrect, miss) of her/his trial 
displayed for 500 ms. In total, 120 trials are performed, with a complete run taking around 10 
minutes. Before the onset of the task, the particip ant received instructions on what to do for 
all trials.  
 
 
Data collection 
The measuring equipment used in this experimental campaign was an EEG system 
(electroencephalography) with 64 active Ag-AgCl electrodes (ActiCap, Brain Products Gmbh) 
and an ActiCHamp amplifier (Brain Products, Gmbh) positioned according to the extended 10-
20 system (Oostenveld and Praamstra, 2001). Data were sampled at 500 Hz. For participants 
1-9, electrode Cz could not be recorded and therefore is not present in the dataset. In addition 
to the brain activity, electrode 10 (named ECG in the dataset) was dedicated to recording 
peripheral electrocardiographic activity and was placed on the left fifth intercostal. The 
LabStreamingLayer software 3 was used to accurately synchroniz e the stimuli display and 
physiological data (EEG, ECG) with the responses of the participants to the task. 
 
To obtain the precise location of the electrodes on the scalp, a 3D scanning camera 
by STRUCTURE® and the get_chanlocs plug -in4 developed specifica lly for electrode 
localisation purposes was used (Homölle & Oostenveld, 2019). The specific channel locations 
are documented in the chanlocs folder for each participant. 
 
                                                
3 https://labstreaminglayer.readthedocs.io/info/intro.html 
4 https://github.com/sccn/get_chanlocs/wiki 
Data format 
The data are formatted following the BIDS standard (https://bids.neuroimaging.io/). An 
exemplary folder tree can be seen below.  
+---sub-01 
|   +---ses-S1 
|   |   +---behavioral 
|   |   |       0-Back.mat 
|   |   |       …. 
|   |   +---chanlocs 
|   |   |       get_chanlocs.txt    
|   |   \---eeg 
|   |           Flanker.fdt 
|   |           Flanker.set 
|   |           MATBdiff.fdt 
|   |           MATBdiff.set 
|   |   |       …. 
|   +---ses-S2 
|   |      …. 
+---sub-02 
… 
Participants are numbered from 1 to 29. For each session, the behavioral results, as 
well as the exact electrode locations and individual datasets for each task, are provided. The 
EEG data is saved in the .set/ .fdt file format (two files per dataset). The resting state is divided 
into 4 different datasets: RS_Beg refers to the resting state at the beginning of the session 
and RS_End to the resting state at the end of the session; EC is the abbreviation for eyes 
closed and EO refers to eyes open.  
Furthermore, a Notebook file is available which details the order in which the tasks 
were acquired, if the recording had to be interrupted at any point as well as other comments if 
applicable. The RSME and the KSS scores are included in the database in form of a t able in 
.txt format. 
 
Number in the Notebook Task 
1 PVT 
2 Flanker 
3 Two-Back 
4 One-Back 
5 Zero-Back 
6 MATB-Easy 
7 MATB-Medium 
8 MATB-Difficult 
The trigger list file contains all LSL triggers and what they refer to.  
Other 
MATB Behavioral Data 
The behavioral output of the MATB is saved in a MATLAB structure, with individual 
substructures for each of the tasks. 
TRACK 
2 columns with the X and Y coordinates of the tracking tasks (2 Hz sampling rate). 
SYSMON 
2 columns referring to the onset of a specific alarm (column 1) and reaction time 
(column 2). 
RESMAN  
2 columns with the amount of fuel in the relevant reservoirs (1 Hz sampling rate). 
COMM 
A table with 5 categories: 
- Target: Was the radio message a target (1 = yes) 
- TargetRadio: Which radio needed to be changed (1-4) 
- TargetFrequency: What was the target frequency 
- Reacted: Did the participant react to the radio message and change some 
radio frequency (1 = yes) 
- Correct Was the change in the radio frequency correct (1 = yes) 
 
 
 
  
References 
 
Brouwer, A.-M., Hogervorst, M. A., Erp, J. B. F. van, Heffelaar, T., Zimmerman, P. H., & 
Oostenveld, R. (2012). Estimating workload using EEG spectral power and ERPs in 
the n-back task. Journal of Neural Engineering, 9(4), 045008. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/9/4/045008 
Cabon, P., Rome, F., Mollard, R., Vollard, C., & Reuzeau, F. (2007). Calibration of mental 
workload measures during the design process of future Airbus military transport 
Aircraft: the Workload Assessment Method (WAM). Aviation space and 
environmental medicine, 78(3), 335. 
Dinges, D. F., & Powell, J. W. (1985). Microcomputer analyses of performance on a 
portable, simple visual RT task during sustained operations. Behavior Research 
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 17(6), 652‑655. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03200977 
Eriksen, B. A., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise letters upon the identification of a 
target letter in a nonsearch task. Perception & Psychophysics, 16(1), 143‑149. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03203267 
Homölle, S., & Oostenveld, R. (2019). Using a structured-light 3D scanner to improve EEG 
source modeling with more accurate electrode positions. Journal of Neuroscience 
Methods, 326, 108378. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2019.108378 
Jaeggi, S. M., Buschkuehl, M., Perrig, W. J., & Meier, B. (2010). The concurrent validity of 
the N-back task as a working memory measure. Memory, 18(4), 394‑412. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09658211003702171 
Lamond, N., Dawson, D., & Roach, G. D. (2005). Fatigue Assessment in the Field : 
Validation of a Hand-Held Electronic Psychomotor Vigilance Task. Aviation, Space, 
and Environmental Medicine, 76(5), 486‑489. 
Oberauer, K., Wilhelm, O., Schulze, R., & Süss, H.-M. (2005). Working memory and 
intelligence - their correlation and their relation : Comment on Ackerman, Beier, and 
Boyle (2005). Psychological Bulletin, 131(1), 61‑65. 
Oostenveld, R., & Praamstra, P. (2001). The five percent electrode system for high-
resolution EEG and ERP measurements. Clinical neurophysiology, 112(4), 713-719. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1388-2457(00)00527-7 
Reifman, J., Kumar, K., Khitrov, M. Y., Liu, J., & Ramakrishnan, S. (2018). PC-PVT 2.0 : An 
updated platform for psychomotor vigilance task testing, analysis, prediction, and 
visualization. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 304, 39‑45. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2018.04.007 
Santiago-Espada, Y., Myer, R. R., Latorella, K. A., & Comstock, J. R. (2011). The Multi-
Attribute Task Battery II (MATB-II) Software for Human Performance and Workload 
Research : A User’s Guide (L‑20031). https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20110014456 
Verdière, K. J., Albert, M., Dehais, F., & Roy, R. N. (2020). Physiological synchrony revealed 
by delayed coincidence count: application to a cooperative complex environment. 
IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems, 50(5), 395-404. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/THMS.2020.2986417 
 